---
title:       Analog A/V Routing Switcher
description: An audio/video routing switcher, it can distribute an a/v (composite) signal from any of the 5 inputs to any of the 5 outputs.
date:        2013-06-24 20:03:56 EDT
lastmod:     2018-12-10 21:58:15 EST
permalink:   /posts/projects/avs50/
thumbnail:   avs50

categories:  [projects]
tags:        [rackmount, audio-video, diy]

sitemap-priority: 0.9
sitemap-galleries: [project-avs50, project-avs50-front-panel, project-avs50-case]


---

**This is an old project!** I made it 10 years ago. My DIY skills improved quite a bit since then...

<!--thumbnail-->

It’s an audio/video (composite) routing switcher, i used it to switch between video sources on my tv. The tv I had back then only had 1 video input. It consist of a 8×8 video crosspoint ([MAX4456][datasheet-max4456]) and a 16×16 analog crosspoint ([AD8113][datasheet-ad8113]) controlled by a small microcontroller ([PIC18F452][datasheet-pic18f452]). It allowed me to distribute an audio/video signal from 5 different sources to 5 outputs by selecting it on the panel. I could split the audio from one input channel and take the video from another one if I wanted. It has 8 presets I can program to quickly recall channels assignation. It’s still working and I still use it today, but now, it’s used for routing audio only.


<!--more-->

{% include gallery name='project-avs50' %}

## Crosspoint

There is a possibility of 8 inputs and 8 outputs but only 5 were used, 4 input/output on the back panel, 1 input/output on the front. I modified it later for 6 inputs and 2 outputs because i ran out of input channels. It can only accept a composite video signal in glorious full SD quality.

This was my first project using a PIC microcontroller, right after the "Hello World" equivalent of PIC programming, the blinking LED… I also used another PIC (16F675) for the black video generator, it generates a NTSC video signal by using 2 ports.

I had plan to add an LED audio level meter, but that idea never made it passed the prototype stage.


## Front panel

I did not built this one from scratch, I used Front Panel Express instead, you send them your design by using the software they provide and they ship you back the fabricated panel about 3 weeks later. This was not cheap tough. This panel, costed about 70$ US + shipping to fabricate, but the quality definitely worth it.

{% include gallery name='project-avs50-front-panel' %}


## Chassis

{% include gallery name='project-avs50-case' %}


## The next version...

I had plans to build a HDMI routing switcher based on the same concept as this one. I started building it but had put the project on hold for now. Maybe I did bite a little more that I could chew on this one… The front panel is done, a part of the case is built, but the switcher core is nowhere near complete.



[datasheet-ad8113]: https://www.analog.com/en/switchesmultiplexers/analog-crosspoint-switches/ad8113/products/product.html
[datasheet-max4456]: https://www.maximintegrated.com/datasheet/index.mvp/id/1931
[datasheet-pic18f452]: https://www.microchip.com/wwwproducts/Devices.aspx?dDocName=en010296
